Thinking about Final Project
================

## PSY V0500 Statistical Methods in Psychology

## Kevin R Foster, Colin Powell School, the City College of New York, CUNY

To recap the plan of the class: we have Exam 2 just before spring break.
That’s the last exam. The remainder of the time you’ll be working on a
final project to show off your statistical abilities.

For the final project you should pick a topic to explore farther, using
the BRFSS data. Follow your curiousity! You should begin reading some
research papers to see what other people are doing. In Lab 5 I reference
some papers on cannabis but you don’t have to focus on substance use –
find something that interests you!

Each homework will ask you to read a paper or two and give a summary.
These summaries can become the literature review section of your final
project.

It would be great if this project leads into a thesis topic! If there is
an area that you’re already passionate about, you can go deeper here.
This project could be a great work sample if you’re going to apply to
PhD programs, where you can show off your virtuosity. But, I know,
sometimes it’s just a paper to get a grade and move on.

For the next few weeks, we’ll take time in each class for you to talk a
bit about topics that you’re exploring. Don’t worry if you shift around
a lot, if you start off in one area and wander for a couple weeks.
That’s research. After spring break, the last 2 class meetings will be
substantially devoted to your presentations. You can learn from what
your colleagues are doing as well as sharpening your own questions and
getting feedback.

Note that this project is mainly to show off your stats. While you
should be able to provide short summaries of the key theories that
motivate or help understand those stats, the main point is the stats –
that’s the class title. Don’t spend too much time with the rest.

A common question: can this project overlap with other classes? Yes – so
long as the relevant instructors know. If one of your other classes
requires an annotated bibliography where you write a detailed analysis
of other research on a particular topic, that’s great! You can combine
that with some stats work and make a really solid piece of work. But
both instructors should know that.

You can choose another dataset, if there’s some other topic that really
lights you up. Talk with me, I can help with getting it set up.

As for the setup of the project, you can think of it as going through
all of the labs from class, but organized around a unified research
question. From simple stats to hypothesis tests to nice graphs to
integrated prediction models of increasing sophistication.
